0:14
In the previous lesson, we discussed the agriculture revolution and the impact
it had upon humans, upon plants, upon animals. We saw at least in the case of
humans and animals, the agriculture revolution was quite a paradoxical process,
because from evolutionary perspective, it was a huge success, leading to the most
multiplication and spread of humans and farm animals all over the world. Whereas
12,000 years ago, there are perhaps 7M humans in the world and there are about
same number of cattle. Today there are 7B humans in the world and about 1.5B
cattle. But from the perspective of the individual out of the species, the
agriculture revolution was pretty bad news. Individual peasants in most period of
history lived harder lives than their great grand parents, the foragers. The individual
cows and bulls felt even worse. They are probably among the most miserable animals
ever to exist.

1:25
The collective evolutionary success is coupled, as we saw in previous lesson, with
a lot of individual sufferings. In this lesson we will look more closely, the impact
of the agriculture revolution on humans and on the society that they created. The
most important impact, was the appearance of far more complex human societies than
ever before. Foragers lived in small band of a few dozen individuals which sometimes
belong to tribes of several hundreds or even thousands of people. In contrast,
farmers live their lives in villages and towns of hundreds or even thousands of people,
and with time, they established large cities, kingdoms and empires in which millions
of people cooperated on a daily basis towards common goals.

2:24
One reason for the growth of these big and complex human societies, was that
agriculture produced far more food per given territory than hunting and gathering
, and area which could support maybe 100 foragers by hunting and gathering, could
support 10,000 people by agriculture. Yet this growth in the amount of food is
only part of the story. In order to build large cities, kingdoms and empires, more
food is of course a necessary condition, but it's not a sufficient condition. The
mere fact that you can feed 10,000 people in the same town, or 1M people in the
same kingdom, does not guarantee that they can agree how to divide the food, how
to divide the land and water, how to settle disputes and conflicts and how to act
in times of crisis, like drought or war.

3:34
And if people cannot reach agreement about such things, then conflict spreads,
even if the storehouses and granaries are full of food. For example, it was not
food shortages that caused the most of the big wars and revolutions in history.
The French Revolution, contrary to common images, was led, not by famish peasants,
but by fat lawyers. They were the ones who led the revolution. Similarly, the two
world wars, say world war I and world war II, they did not begin due to a shortage
of food in Germany, in France or in Britain.

4:18
There was plenty of food in Europe in 1914 and 1939. The war broke because of
disagreement about other things. Similarly in Yugoslavia in 1991, when the balkan
civil war in Yugoslavia began, the reason was not shortage of food. There was
enough food to feed all the Serbs, all the Croates and all the Bosnians. And
they nevertheless reached a point of conflict because of disagreement about other
things. I know it from my own personal experience, I live in the land between
Mediterranean and the Jordan river which some people call it Israel and other people
call it Palestine. And since the day I was born and actually long before that, this
country, this country, this land has not known even a single day of peace. Even though, there
is enough food in the lands between the Jordan river and Mediterranean to feed
all these Israelis and Palestinians, all the Jews, Christians and Muslims. There
is no shortage of food. But there is no way that these people, my neighbors, me
myself can agree about other stuff, like politics, religions and so forth. So
this is why it is very difficult to create a stable social and political order
here.

5:49
The problem and the root of such wars and calamities is Sapien simply has no
nature instincts for cooperating with large number of strangers. Humans evolved
for millions of years, living in small bands comprising maybe a few dozen individuals.
The handful of millennial separating that agriculture revolution from the appearance
of cities, kingdoms and empires was simply not enough time to allow for massive
cooperation instincts to evolve by nature selection. So in order to nevertheless
be able to create cities, kingdoms and empires, Sapiens could not rely on such
instincts because they don't have them. Sapiens have to rely on inventing all kinds
of stories, all kinds of new imaged realities that could regulate cooperation on
such a huge scale.

6:52
We discussed in previous lesson, that foragers created stories, told stories like
ancestral spirits and tribe totems. And these stories enabled maybe 500 people to
trade seashells and to celebrate together festivals and to join forces to fight
agains other humans or other neanderthals or other Sapiens. Farmers use the same
trick but only much much large scale. Farmers began to weave stories that eventually
enable millions of strangers, not hundreds of strangers, to cooperate together.
If we go back to around 8500 BC, we find the largest settlements in the world
were villages such as Jerryco which contains a few hundred individuals at most.

7:52
By 3000 BC, 5000 years later, you can already find cities and kingdoms ruling tens
of thousands, and even hundreds of thousands of people. By the first millennial BC,
there were empires like the Roman Empire in the Mediterranean region, and the Han
Empire in China, that rules tens of millions of people.

8:22
These cities and kingdoms and empires were based on the belief in common imaged
realities. And therefore the order that maintains the existence can be called an
imaged order. This imaged order means the social and legal nodes that sustained
these kingdoms and empires and kept those society stable were not based on some
nature instincts and not on personal acquaintance because you couldn't know millions
of people. Rather they were based on the belief in shared stories, in shared imaged
realities. How exactly can stories and imagination sustained huge empires like
the Roman empire, the Persian empire, the Chinese empire.

9:23 
