chapter 01
==========

This is chapter 01.

chapter 02
==========

This is chapter 02.

chapter 03 A Day in the Life of Adam and Eve
============================================

The curtain of silence shrouds tens of thousands of years of history. These long
millennia may well have witnessed wars and revolutions, ecstatic religious
movements, profound philosophical theories, incomparable masterpieces. The foragers
may have had their all-conquering Napoleans, who ruled empires half the size of
Luxembourg; gifed Beethovens who lacked symphony orchestras but brought people
to tears with the sound of their bamboo flutes; and charismatic prophets who
revealed the words of a local oak tree rather than those of a universal creator
god. But these are all mere guesses. The curtains of silence is so thick that we
cannot even be sure such things occured - let alone describe them in detail.

chapter 05 History's Biggest Fraud
==================================

Village life certainly brought the first farmers some immediate benefits, such as
better protection against wild animals, rain and cold. Yet for the average person,
the disadvantages probably outweighted the advantages. This is hard for people in
today's prosperous societies to appreciate. Since we enjoy affluence and security,
and since our affluence and security are built on foundations laid by the Agricultural
Revolution, we assume that the Agricultural Revolution was a wonderful improvement.
Yet it is wrong to judge thousands of years of history from the perspective of today.
A much more representative viewpoint is that of a three-year-old girl dying from
malnutrition in first-century China because her father's crops have failed. Would
she say 'I am dying from malnutrition, but in 2000 years, people will have plenty
to eat and live in big air-conditioned houses, so my suffering is a worthwhile
sacrifice'?

... This discrepancy between evolutionary success and individual suffering is
perhaps the most important lesson we can draw from the Agricultural Revolution.
When we study the narrative of plants such as wheat and maize, maybe the purely
evolutionary perspective makes sense. Yet in the case of animals such as cattle,
sheep and Sapiens, each with a complex world of sensations and emotions, we have
to consider how evolutionary success translates into individual experience. In
the following chapters we will see time and again how a dramatic increase in the
collective power and ostensible success of our species went hand in hand with much
individual suffering.
